---
layout: post
use_math: true
title: "Statistics, Probability and Chaos"
categories:
- Chaos
tags:
- chaos
- noise
- ergodic theory
- complexity
- entropy
- time series
---

<h2> Intro </h2>
Can machines predict deterministic yet chaotic system? Can we distinguish noise from structural chaos from given data? Can machines recognize patterns from highly patternless system?
<br/>
To answer these questions, one needs to understand and define what patternless is. Many mathematicians defined the notion of patternless as chaos. Good definitions  
<br/>

<h2> Notations and Prerequisites </h2>
def) x is fixed point of f if $ f(x) = x $
<br/>
<br/>

### Proposition
Let p be a fixed point of f. If $|f'(p)| < 1$, then there exists a neighbourhood U of p such that, for all x in U, $\lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} f^{n}(x) = p.$ Such fixed point p is called attracting fixed point and the set U is a stable set. When $|f'(p)| > 1$, then p is called repelling fixed point. When $|f'(p)| = 1$, p is saddle point.

<h4> Ergodic Theory </h4>
"When can we expect the average of the data over time in the first experiment to be the same as the average of the data over the replicates at a fixed time?"
<br/>
$ (X,F,\mu) $ is probability space. $ f: X \rightarrow X $ is measure preserving with respect to $ \mu $ if for any A in F, $ \mu(f^{-1}(A)) = \mu(A) $
<br/> 
A in F is invariant if $ f^{-1}(A) = A $ for invertible transformation f and $ f^{t}(A) = A $ for any $ t > 0 $.
<br/>
f is ergodic if for any invariant subset A in F, $ \mu (A) = 0 or 1 $. 
<br/> So if  f is ergodic, the sample path is not trapped in the subset of domain.
<br/>

### Ergodic Theorem
If f is measure preserving and ergodic on $ (X,F, \mu) $, and Y is any random variable ( $ E[|Y|] < \infty $) then $ \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} Y(f^{i}(x_{0})) = E_{P}(Y) $ almost surely 


<br/>
#### Chaos
How can we define the measure of paternless?
<br/>
Most definitions of Chaos involve these two.<br/>
1. Sensitivity to inditial conditions : Small perturbation can induce big difference in results.<br/>
2. Recurrence / Mixing / Topological Transitivity : Some paths of the dynamical system generated by f eventually visit all regions of D.
<br/>
<br/>
Formally, $f : D \rightarrow D $ is sensitive to intial conditions if there exists $\delta >  0$ such that for any x in D and any neighborhood V of x, there exists y in V and $n \geq 0$ such that $|f^{n}(x) - f^{n}(y)| > delta$ <br/>
$f:D \rightarrow D$ is topologically transtive if for any pair of open sets U, V in D there exists $ n > 0 $ such that $f^{n}(U) \cap V$ is not empty.

<br/>
<h4>Measure of Chaos</h4>
<h5>1. Lyapunov exponents</h5>
definition : $ \lambda (x_{0}) = \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac{1}{n} log[ | \frac{dx_{n}}{dx_{0}} |] $
<\br>
To estimate lyapunov exponents from noisy dataset, refer [Nychka, McCAffrey, Ellner and Gallant](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2346135).

<h5>2. </h5>



### Reference
[Statistics, Probability and Chaos (Berliner, 1992)](https://pdodds.w3.uvm.edu/files/papers/others/1992/berliner1992a.pdf)
[Chaos and Intrinsic Unpredictability (Heninger and Johnson, 2023)](http://aiimpacts.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Chaos-and-Intrinsic-Unpredictability.pdf)
