---
layout: post
use_math: true
title: "Graph Neural Network"
subtitle: "Lecture and note based on Stanford CS224W"
categories:
- Graph Neural Network
tags:
- graph neural network
- neural network
- graph
---

$G = (V,E) $ is a graph. Let $ A $ be an adjency matrix of a graph G. <br>
There are 3-Levels of learning tasks.<br>
1. Node level
2. Link level
3. Graph level

<h5>Node Features</h5>
Intro : Given the classes of some nodes, we want to know the class of other nodes.
#### 1. Node Centrality
- **Eigenvalue Centrality** <br>
Node is important if its neighborhood is important.<br>
$u_{s} = \frac{1}{\lambda} \sum_{v \in N(s)} u_{v} $ ($\lambda$ is the normalizing constant.) <br>
$\lambda u = Au$ where A is adjencey matrix. Thus, $\lambda$ is the eigenvalue of A. 
By Perron-Frobenius Theorem, since all the elements of A are non-negative the largest eigenvalue is positive.
We usually choose eigenvector u corresponding to the largest eigenvalue as node centrality.

- **Betweenness Centrality**<br>
Node is important if it lies on many shortest paths.<br>
$u_{s} = \sum_{v \neq s \neq w} \frac{\text{the number of shortest path paths between v and w that pass through s}}{\text{the number of shortest paths between v and w}} $

- **Closeness Centrality**<br>
Node is important if it has small shortest path lengths to all other nodes.<br>
$u_{s} =  \frac{1}{\sum_{v \neq s}\text{shortest path length between v and s}}$

- **Clustering Coefficients**<br>
Node is important if connected to many neighboring nodes.<br>
$e_{v} = \frac{\text{the number of edges among neighboring nodes}}{k_{v} \text{choose} 2}$
It counts the number of triangles that a node touches.

- **Graphlets**<br>
Count the number of pre-specified subgraphs with the given node.

<h5>Link Features</h5>
Given the graph, we want to predict the link or relationship between two different nodes. For example, a link between node is deleted then the connection is predicted for research on chemical reactions. Connection between people can be predicted for social network studies.

- **Distance based link features**
The link feature between two nodes is measured by the shortest path between two nodes.
Yet, this does not capture the degree of nodes.

- **Local Neighborhood Overlap**
Captures the number of common neighbors of two nodes.<br>
(i) Common Neighbors : $ |N(v_{1})\cap N(v_{2})| $<br>
(ii) Jaccard's coefficient : $\frac{ |N(v_{1})\cap N(v_{2})|}{|N(v_{1})\bigcup N(v_{2})|}$<br>
(iii) Adamic-Adar index : $\sum_{u \in N(v_{1})\cap N(v_{2})} \frac{1}{\log k_{u}} $ ($k_{u}$ is the degree of node u) So as node u is popular and connected to many other nodes, it is less likely that neighbors of node u are linked together. (Think about celebrity.)
<br>
Local Neighborhood Overlap fails to connect two nodes without common neighbors.

- **Global Neighborhood Overlap**
Karz index counts the number of walks of all lengths between two nodes. It is easily countable by using adjency matrix.
$S_{v_{1},v_{2}} = \sum_{i=1}^{\infty}\beta^{i}A_{v_1,v_2}^{i} $ is the karz index between node v1 and v2. ($\beta$ is the discount factor for each walk, $A_{v_1,v_2}^{i} $ is the walks of length i between two nodes.) <br>
By the geometric series, $ S = (I-\beta A)^{-1} - I $

<h5>Graph-level Features</h5>
Use Graph Kernels for similarity of graphs. i.e. $K(G,G') = \phi(G)^{T} \phi(G')$ is the functional.<br>

- **Graphlet Kernel**
Idea : Bag of words for graph. But to compute this, subgraph isomorphism must be found. It is NP-hard.

- **Weisfeiler-Lehman Kernel**

- **Randon-Walk Kernel**

- **Shortest-path graph kernel**

- and many others...

  For more details on graph kernels, refer [Intro to Graph Kernels ppt(ETHZ)](https://ethz.ch/content/dam/ethz/special-interest/bsse/borgwardt-lab/documents/slides/CA10_GraphKernels_intro.pdf) and [A survey on graph kernels, Kriege et al(2020)](file:///Users/piprober/Downloads/s41109-019-0195-3%20(1).pdf)


